docs/smile.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: smile
---

# smile – Tile1 core + debugger playground

`smile` is a small environment for experimenting with a single RV32 core (`Tile1`), simple accelerators, and a debugger, **outside** of the full `smicro` SoC harness.

It gives you:

- A standalone RV32 core (`Tile1`)
- A clean memory abstraction (`MemoryPort`)
- A tiny instruction decoder and execute helpers
- A debugger REPL (breakpoints, stepping, memory dump)
- A testbench (`tb_tile1`) that ties it all together

The idea: you can iterate on the core, accelerators, and debugger here, then reuse the same pieces when the core is embedded in `smicro`.

---

## Big picture: who talks to whom?

In the `tb_tile1` testbench, the wiring looks like this:

```text
         +---------------------+
         |    tb_tile1.cpp     |
         |---------------------|
         |  - creates…         |
         |    - Tile1          |
         |    - Dram           |
         |    - DramMemoryPort |
         |    - accel          |
         |    - debugger       |
         +----------+----------+
                    |
                    V
         Tile1 (CPU core, Tile1.cpp / Tile1_exec.cpp)
                    |
                    | MemoryPort::read32 / write32
                    V
       DramMemoryPort (shim, defined in tb_tile1.cpp)
                    |
                    | Dram::read / Dram::write
                    V
          Dram (pulled in from smicro/src/Dram.hpp)

          +-------------------+
          | AccelArraySum     |
          | (AccelArraySum.*) |
          | talks to memory   |
          | via same          |
          | MemoryPort        |
          +-------------------+
```
On each cycle:
1. The debugger calls Sim::run().
2.	Cascade ticks the clock and calls Tile1::tick().
3.	Tile1::tick() fetches an instruction via mem_port_->read32(pc).
4.	The memory port shim turns that into a Dram::read(...) and returns the word.
5.	Tile1 decodes and executes the instruction (possibly calling the accelerator).
6.	The debugger inspects state and prints traces / breakpoints as needed.

## smile/ directory structure

```bash
smile/
├── include/         # Public headers for the core, accels, debugger
│   ├── AccelArraySum.hpp
│   ├── AccelDemoAdd.hpp
│   ├── AccelPort.hpp
│   ├── Debugger.hpp
│   ├── Diagnostics.hpp
│   ├── Instruction.hpp
│   ├── Tile1_exec.hpp
│   └── Tile1.hpp
├── src/
│   ├── AccelArraySum.cpp    # array-sum accelerator implementation
│   ├── AccelDemoAdd.cpp     # trivial demo accelerator
│   ├── Debugger.cpp         # debugger REPL + stepping logic
│   ├── Diagnostics.cpp      # helper traces/asserts
│   ├── Instruction.cpp      # RV32I decoder
│   ├── tb_tile1.cpp         # testbench main() for Tile1 + Dram + debugger
│   ├── Tile1_exec.cpp       # exec_* helpers (ALU, loads, branches, CSR, custom0)
│   ├── Tile1.cpp            # core pipeline: fetch/decode/execute/trap
│   └── util/
│       ├── FlatBinLoader.cpp  # load flat .bin into MemoryPort
│       └── FlatBinLoader.hpp
├── progs/              # example programs + linker script
│   ├── link_rv32.ld    # minimal RV32 linker script (places _start at 0x0)
│   ├── smexit.c        # simplest “exit via ecall 93” program
│   ├── smurf.c         # core test program
│   ├── smurf_debug.c   # debugger-focused tests
│   ├── smurf_threads.c # multithread-flavoured tests (for future)
│   ├── prog.elf        # built ELF (from smurf.c or similar)
│   └── prog.bin        # flat binary image (for tb_tile1)
├── plans/
│   └── smileplans.md   # scratchpad: roadmap and notes
└── CMakeLists.txt      # build rules for the smile binary
```
## Core Pieces
- `Tile1` (`Tile1.hpp/cpp`): the RV32 core implementation
  - Files: `include/Tile1.hpp`, `src/Tile1.cpp`, `src/Tile1_exec.cpp`, `include/Instruction.hpp`, `src/Instruction.cpp`
  - Role: implements a simple RV32I core
    - one main entrypoint per cycle: `void Tile1::tick()` 
    - standard logical handling sequence: fetch, decode, execute, trap/PC update
  - Notes:
    - uses `MemoryPort` to talk to memory (abstract interface, `Tile1` never talks directly to DRAM)
    - uses `Instruction` for decoding RV32I instructions
    - uses exec_* helpers in `Tile1_exec.cpp` for ALU, loads, branches, CSR, custom0
- `MemoryPort`: a general protocol link for `Tile1` to talk to memories through
  - Files: `include/Tile1.hpp` (abstract class defined here), `src/tb_tile1.cpp` (concrete implementation for a Dram model)
  - Role: abstrace memory interface for allowing `Tile1` to access all sorts of memory backends  
    - exposes simple word-oriented API: `read32(addr)`, `write32(addr, value)`.
    - designed to be synchronous (0-delay) for simplicity.
- Accelerators: 
  - Files: `include/AccelPort.hpp`, `include/AccelArraySum.hpp/cpp`, `include/AccelDemoAdd.hpp/cpp`
  - Role: simple accelerators that `Tile1` can call via custom0 instructions
    - `AccelPort`: abstract interface for “something that can take a CUSTOM-0 instruction and optional memory access.”
    - `AccelArraySum`: an example accelerator that sums an array in memory.
- `Debugger`: 
  - Files: `include/Debugger.hpp`, `src/Debugger.cpp`
  - Role: a simple REPL debugger for stepping through instructions, setting breakpoints, and inspecting state
    - connected to `Tile1` to read registers, PC, and memory via `MemoryPort`.
- `Testbench` 
  - Files: `src/tb_tile1.cpp`
  - Role: a simple testbench that instantiates `Tile1`, `Dram`, and `Debugger` and runs the simulation. 
    - loads a flat binary program into memory
    - runs the simulation loop, calling `Tile1::tick()` and `Debugger::run()`

## Example usage
Build:
```bash
cd smarc
cmake -S . -B build -DCEDAR_DIR=/path/to/Cascade/cedar
cmake --build build --target tb_tile1 -j
```
Run with the default hard-coded program:
```bash
./build/smile/tb_tile1 -steps=50
```
Run a compiled program:
```bash
cd smile/progs
riscv64-unknown-elf-gcc -march=rv32im -mabi=ilp32 \
  -nostartfiles -nostdlib -T link_rv32.ld \
  smurf.c -o prog.elf

riscv64-unknown-elf-objcopy -O binary prog.elf prog.bin

cd ../..
./build/smile/tb_tile1 -prog=smile/progs/prog.bin -load_addr=0x0 -start_pc=0x0 -steps=100
```
Launch the interactive debugger:
```bash
./build/smile/tb_tile1 -prog=smile/progs/prog.bin -load_addr=0x0 -start_pc=0x0
# then in the REPL:
smile> step
smile> regs
smile> mem 0x100 4
smile> break 0x10
smile> cont
smile> exit
```
## Relationship to smicro
- smile focuses on
  - a single core (`Tile1`)
  - instruction set
  - accelerators
  - debugger REPL
- smicro focuses on
  - SoC wiring (MemCtrl, DRAM, suites),
  - memory protocols (MemReq/MemResp),
  - different topologies and test suites

The same `Tile1` + `Instruction` + `Tile1_exec` + accelerator code is meant to be shared between smile and smicro. The only thing that changes is how the MemoryPort is implemented and how the core gets clocked.

Commit message:

Docs: refine smile and getting-started guides
Update documentation with clearer examples and small fixes:
- Replace hardcoded CEDAR_DIR path with a placeholder.
- Expand and clarify run examples in getting-started (notes about debugger REPL, trace contexts, showcontexts, and updated trace filters for smicro).
- Add explanatory inline comments to smile.md's include/src file listings, fix typos/punctuation (e.g. "abstrace" -> "abstract"), remove the plans/ entry, and ensure trailing newline.
- General formatting and wording improvements to make the guides more helpful for users.

docs/smile.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: smile
---

# smile – Tile1 core + debugger playground

`smile` is a small environment for experimenting with a single RV32 core (`Tile1`), simple accelerators, and a debugger, **outside** of the full `smicro` SoC harness.

It gives you:

- A standalone RV32 core (`Tile1`)
- A clean memory abstraction (`MemoryPort`)
- A tiny instruction decoder and execute helpers
- A debugger REPL (breakpoints, stepping, memory dump)
- A testbench (`tb_tile1`) that ties it all together

The idea: you can iterate on the core, accelerators, and debugger in `smile`, then reuse the same pieces when the core is embedded in `smicro`.

---

## Big picture: who talks to whom?

In the `tb_tile1` testbench, the wiring looks like this:

```text
         +---------------------+
         |    tb_tile1.cpp     |
         |---------------------|
         |  - creates…         |
         |    - Tile1          |
         |    - Dram           |
         |    - DramMemoryPort |
         |    - accel          |
         |    - debugger       |
         +----------+----------+
                    |
                    V
         Tile1 (CPU core, Tile1.cpp / Tile1_exec.cpp)
                    |
                    | MemoryPort::read32 / write32
                    V
       DramMemoryPort (shim, defined in tb_tile1.cpp)
                    |
                    | Dram::read / Dram::write
                    V
          Dram (pulled in from smicro/src/Dram.hpp)

          +-------------------+
          | AccelArraySum     |
          | (AccelArraySum.*) |
          | talks to memory   |
          | via same          |
          | MemoryPort        |
          +-------------------+
```
On each cycle:
1. The debugger calls Sim::run().
2.	Cascade ticks the clock and calls Tile1::tick().
3.	Tile1::tick() fetches an instruction via mem_port_->read32(pc).
4.	The memory port shim turns that into a Dram::read(...) and returns the word.
5.	Tile1 decodes and executes the instruction (possibly calling the accelerator).
6.	The debugger inspects state and prints traces / breakpoints as needed.

## smile/ directory structure

```bash
smile/
├── include/         # Public headers for the core, accels, debugger
│   ├── AccelArraySum.hpp   # array-sum accelerator interface
│   ├── AccelDemoAdd.hpp    # demo accelerator interface
│   ├── AccelPort.hpp       # abstract accelerator port interface
│   ├── Debugger.hpp        # debugger REPL interface
│   ├── Diagnostics.hpp     # diagnostics/tracing helpers
│   ├── Instruction.hpp     # RV32I instruction decode interface
│   ├── Tile1_exec.hpp      # exec_* helper declarations
│   └── Tile1.hpp           # Tile1 core interface + MemoryPort API
├── src/
│   ├── AccelArraySum.cpp    # array-sum accelerator implementation
│   ├── AccelDemoAdd.cpp     # trivial demo accelerator
│   ├── Debugger.cpp         # debugger REPL + stepping logic
│   ├── Diagnostics.cpp      # helper traces/asserts
│   ├── Instruction.cpp      # RV32I decoder
│   ├── tb_tile1.cpp         # testbench main() for Tile1 + Dram + debugger
│   ├── Tile1_exec.cpp       # exec_* helpers (ALU, loads, branches, CSR, custom0)
│   ├── Tile1.cpp            # core pipeline: fetch/decode/execute/trap
│   └── util/
│       ├── FlatBinLoader.cpp  # load flat .bin into MemoryPort
│       └── FlatBinLoader.hpp  # loader interface for flat binaries
├── progs/              # example programs + linker script
│   ├── link_rv32.ld    # minimal RV32 linker script (places _start at 0x0)
│   ├── smexit.c        # simplest “exit via ecall 93” program
│   ├── smurf.c         # core test program
│   ├── smurf_debug.c   # debugger-focused tests
│   ├── smurf_threads.c # multithread-flavoured tests (for future)
│   ├── prog.elf        # built ELF (from smurf.c or similar)
│   └── prog.bin        # flat binary image (for tb_tile1)
└── CMakeLists.txt      # build rules for the smile binary
```
## Core Pieces
- `Tile1` (`Tile1.hpp/cpp`): the RV32 core implementation
  - Files: `include/Tile1.hpp`, `src/Tile1.cpp`, `src/Tile1_exec.cpp`, `include/Instruction.hpp`, `src/Instruction.cpp`
  - Role: implements a simple RV32I core
    - one main entrypoint per cycle: `void Tile1::tick()` 
    - standard logical handling sequence: fetch, decode, execute, trap/PC update
  - Notes:
    - uses `MemoryPort` to talk to memory (abstract interface, `Tile1` never talks directly to DRAM)
    - uses `Instruction` for decoding RV32I instructions
    - uses exec_* helpers in `Tile1_exec.cpp` for ALU, loads, branches, CSR, custom0
- `MemoryPort`: a general protocol link for `Tile1` to talk to memories through
  - Files: `include/Tile1.hpp` (abstract class defined here), `src/tb_tile1.cpp` (concrete implementation for a Dram model)
  - Role: abstract memory interface for allowing `Tile1` to access all sorts of memory backends  
    - exposes simple word-oriented API: `read32(addr)`, `write32(addr, value)`.
    - designed to be synchronous (0-delay) for simplicity.
- Accelerators: 
  - Files: `include/AccelPort.hpp`, `include/AccelArraySum.hpp/cpp`, `include/AccelDemoAdd.hpp/cpp`
  - Role: simple accelerators that `Tile1` can call via custom0 instructions
    - `AccelPort`: abstract interface for “something that can take a CUSTOM-0 instruction and optional memory access.”
    - `AccelArraySum`: an example accelerator that sums an array in memory.
- `Debugger`: 
  - Files: `include/Debugger.hpp`, `src/Debugger.cpp`
  - Role: a simple REPL debugger for stepping through instructions, setting breakpoints, and inspecting state
    - connected to `Tile1` to read registers, PC, and memory via `MemoryPort`.
- `Testbench`:
  - Files: `src/tb_tile1.cpp`
  - Role: a simple testbench that instantiates `Tile1`, `Dram`, and `Debugger` and runs the simulation. 
    - loads a flat binary program into memory
    - runs the simulation loop, calling `Tile1::tick()` and `Debugger::run()`

## Example usage
Build:
```bash
cd smarc
cmake -S . -B build -DCEDAR_DIR=/path/to/Cascade/cedar
cmake --build build --target tb_tile1 -j
```
Run with the default hard-coded program:
```bash
./build/smile/tb_tile1 -steps=50
```
Run a compiled program:
```bash
cd smile/progs
riscv64-unknown-elf-gcc -march=rv32im -mabi=ilp32 \
  -nostartfiles -nostdlib -T link_rv32.ld \
  smurf.c -o prog.elf

riscv64-unknown-elf-objcopy -O binary prog.elf prog.bin

cd ../..
./build/smile/tb_tile1 -prog=smile/progs/prog.bin -load_addr=0x0 -start_pc=0x0 -steps=100
```
Launch the interactive debugger:
```bash
./build/smile/tb_tile1 -prog=smile/progs/prog.bin -load_addr=0x0 -start_pc=0x0
# then in the REPL:
smile> step
smile> regs
smile> mem 0x100 4
smile> break 0x10
smile> cont
smile> exit
```
## Relationship to smicro
- smile focuses on
  - a single core (`Tile1`)
  - instruction set
  - accelerators
  - debugger REPL
- smicro focuses on
  - SoC wiring (MemCtrl, DRAM, suites),
  - memory protocols (MemReq/MemResp),
  - different topologies and test suites

The same `Tile1` + `Instruction` + `Tile1_exec` + accelerator code is meant to be shared between smile and smicro. The only thing that changes is how the MemoryPort is implemented and how the core gets clocked.
